---
layout: page
title: "'Hands up, don't shoot' was built on a lie"
subtitle: A case-study on social movements in the media
---

# Introduction

The starting point for this case-study is an article published in the
Washington Post on March 15, 2015, regarding events that occurred in
August, 2014 in Ferguson, Missouri. The article was written by
journalist Jonathan Capehart following the release of two reports by the
United States Department of Justice (DOJ) on March 4, 2015, one about
the investigation into the shooting death of Michael Brown by Officer
Darren Wilson, and the other about the investigation into the workings
of the Ferguson Police Department.

In his report, Capehart comes to the conclusion that ‘Brown never
surrendered with his hands up, and Wilson was justified in shooting
Brown’ (Capehart 2015). Capehart’s conclusion overturned what was widely
understood to have been an account of fact. By alleging a gap between
fact and a previously accepted narrative, Capehart’s report spurred
heated controversy over the significance of this gap and responsibility
for this gap.

## Context to the case

While Capehart’s report is primarily a review of the DOJ reports, in
presenting his conclusion Capehart had also to address relevant aspects
of broader contextual developments that had shaped the public’s
understanding of events in the time between August 2014 and March 2015.

### Media coverage of Ferguson protests

In Ferguson, Michael Brown’s death on August 9 sparked nearly two weeks
of continuous unrest involving rioting and confrontation between
protesters and police. Scenes of burning buildings, armored police, and
riotous crowds prompted comparisons to war zones, with this dramatic
content featuring prominently in the news cycle. These scenes from
August 2014 would thereafter be associated in the public imagination
with Ferguson and the death of Michael Brown. The extended media
coverage also served to bring national attention to related trends and
stories, such as the increasing prominence of Black Lives Matter.

### Black Lives Matter

Another example of a related story was the case of Eric Garner’s death
in New York in July 2014 during an arrest by NYPD officers, an arrest
which was captured on video and disseminated over the internet. Like
Brown’s death, Garner’s death also inspired protests, debate, and media
commentary. More broadly, Garner’s and Brown’s deaths coincided with the
move to national prominence of Black Lives Matter.

The \#BlackLivesMatter hashtag originated on Facebook, in the wake of
George Zimmerman’s acquittal in July 2013 for the killing of Trayvon
Martin in Florida in 2012. The hashtag became part of discussion the
case, a discussion for which the hashtag served as an aggregation point.
Alicia Garza, who along with Patrisse Cullors is credited with coining
the hashtag, recounts how a Facebook note she composed after she heard
the news of Zimmerman’s acquittal led to the coining of the hashtag in
an interview with USA Today. As USA Today records,

> ‘So she composed a love note to black people on Facebook, urging them
> to come together to ensure “that black lives matter”.
> \[Subsequently,\] Her friend, Patrisse Cullors, a community organizer
> from Los Angeles, spotted the Facebook post and put a hashtag in front
> of those three words. \#BlackLivesMatter was born’ (Guynn 2015).

Nevertheless, it was mostly in 2014 with the protests in Ferguson as
well as Eric Garner’s death in New York that the movement gained
national prominence. Use of the \#BlackLivesMatter hashtag became more
widespread at this time, as platforms like Facebook and Twitter became
sites of activity by protesters and for discussion by a broader public.

### Activity on social media

While traditional broadcast news media played a significant part in
bringing Michael Brown’s death, the Ferguson protests, and the broader
Black Lives Matter movement to mainstream public consciousness, activity
on social media platforms was an integral part of the protests and the
ensuing public discussion. For protesters, hashtags like \#Ferguson,
\#MichaelBrown, and \#HandsUpDontShoot were used to mobilize and gather,
to aggregate information, and to broadcast updates and images from
protest sites. These hashtags naturally also made this content
accessible to a broader audience not physically present at a protest
site. Expressions of solidarity, criticism, and other commentary could
also be hashtagged by their writers.

While the expansion of the discussion on social media can be seen as
having been fueled by traditional media coverage, in the other direction
media commentary was cognizant of and informed by activity on social
media. Social media would have been a source of content like images and
videos, as well as a source of information and context about users’
opinions and influences. A consequence of this was that the content of
hashtag-aggregated discussion as well as the hashtags themselves
received broader media exposure.

# Reading Capehart’s report

The main claim of Capehart’s report was that the public’s understanding
of the circumstances of Michael Brown’s death was mistaken. In making
this claim, however, the writer had to negotiate two main difficulties
regarding his own critical position, namely his own participation as a
journalist in propagating the mistaken understanding of events, as well
as being in the same fraught position as the reader with regard to
social media activity.

Part of Capehart’s strategy in negotiating these difficulties is by
foregrounding a reflective self-consciousness about his position as a
media professional, social media user, and news consumer from the
beginning of the article:

> ‘The late evening of Aug. 9, 2014, I couldn’t sleep. I was due to
> substitute-anchor MSNBC’s “UP with Steve Kornacki” and should have
> been asleep. But after looking at my Twitter feed and reading the rage
> under \#Ferguson, I felt compelled to type a reaction to the killing
> of Michael Brown by police officer Darren Wilson \[…\] I decried the
> next morning the death of yet another unarmed black man at the hands
> of a white police officer’ (Capehart 2015).

Focusing first on social media-related references, we see how Twitter
and \#Ferguson are referred to as common reference points assumed to be
part of the reader’s shared context. By doing so, Capehart puts himself
in a similar position to the reader relative to those reference points.
Another aspect of engagement with social media (as compared to broadcast
media) is that users contribute their own content to the content-stream.
Capehart’s reference to his own Twitter-captured reaction also serves to
position himself relative to the reader’s own experience of engagement
with social media, an experience which involves, in varying degrees,
being both a participant in and subject to the trends and contexts
aggregated by social media platforms.

The other reference Capehart makes in his introduction is to his own
role in communicating the narrative of ‘the death of yet another unarmed
black man at the hands of a white police officer’ on a morning news
broadcast. This acknowledgment of his own professional participation in
publicizing a mistaken version of events served as an implicit criticism
of the news media’s role in misinforming the public. While Capehart does
not proceed to directly state this criticism, later in the article he
does highlight how it failed to rigorously verify the story it
publicized, observing how ‘\[i\]n fact, just about everything said to
the media by Witness 101, whom we all know as Dorian Johnson, the friend
with Brown that day, was not supported by the evidence and other witness
statements’ (Capehart 2015).

Following the introduction, what forms the main body of the article is
the review of the DOJ report on the shooting, relevant sections of which
Capehart highlights in order to demonstrate how ‘ballistic and DNA
evidence and multiple witness statements’ painted a very different
picture of the facts than was popularly understood. These sections all
contributed to demonstrating Capehart’s main claim.

In having to conclude that Wilson had indeed been ‘justified in shooting
Brown’, however, Capehart found himself in a political quandary, in that
this was a conclusion that complicated the relationship between the
campaign for justice inspired by Michael Brown’s death, and the broader
cause of Black Lives Matter. In fact what may be the most compelling
aspect of Capehart’s article is that, in addition to (and in spite of)
demonstrating his main claim about the facts surrounding Brown’s death,
Capehart’s secondary goal was to reaffirm the moral cause of the popular
movement that had rallied in the wake of Brown’s death, and around Brown
as a symbol. As Capehart writes,

> ‘\[…\] “hands up, don’t shoot” became the mantra of a movement. But it
> was wrong, built on a lie \[…\] Yet this does not diminish the
> importance of the real issues unearthed in Ferguson by Brown’s death.
> Nor does it discredit what has become the larger “Black Lives Matter”’
> (Capehart 2015).

The ‘real issues unearthed in Ferguson’ Capehart refers to are described
in the other DOJ report, about the Ferguson police department, a report
which he writes ‘detailed abuse and blatant trampling of the
constitutional rights of people, mostly African Americans’ and
‘\[y\]ears of mistreatment by the police, the courts and the municipal
government’ (Capehart 2015). It was also this context which Capehart
sees as providing the ‘background \[…\] for why a small St. Louis suburb
most had never heard of exploded the moment Brown was killed’ (Capehart
2015).

However, the difficulty was that whereas this report clearly
demonstrated the complicity of local institutions in enacting injustice,
the evidence presented in the report on the shooting were less
conformable to the moral narrative. Commenting on the tension between
the two reports in an August 2015 article for the *The New Yorker*, Jake
Halpern writes that ‘\[t\]ogether, the two reports frustrated attempts
to arrive at a clean moral conclusion. Wilson had violated no protocol
in his deadly interaction with Brown, yet he was part of a corrupt and
racist system’ (Halpern 2015).

With Black Lives Matter, Capehart found himself addressing a parallel
tension between the morality of its broader socio-political cause, and
the morality of its potentially continuing to sanction Michael Brown’s
individual cause. He writes that while Brown had become a ‘potent symbol
of the lack of trust between African Americans and law enforcement’, the
DOJ report ‘\[had shown\] him to be an inappropriate symbol’ (Capehart
2015). In describing the situation in this way, Capehart implies the
distinction between the symbolic force of a representation and the force
of a broader moral cause.

# Analysis & Discussion

In the previous section we see how Capehart’s main claim and secondary
goal put him in the contradictory position of having to affirm the
rightness of the political cause of a social movement while complicating
its claim to said rightness. Besides having to negotiate certain
challenges in achieving a credibly objective critical position, we see
that in the situation he was addressing, the significances of names,
slogans, and people are implicated in a series of cascading contexts.
For instance, \#HandsUpDontShoot is not merely a misrepresentation of
the facts of a case perpetrated by the media, but also a rallying point
for a social movement, and a potent symbolic resource for communicating
the moral implications of institutional injustice.

In order to achieve his rhetorical objectives, Capehart has to
disentangle several levels of context, like the facts of the case, their
representation in the media, the morality of a political project and a
social movement, the symbolic resources they rely on, etc.; but whereas
Capehart negotiates these entangled contexts from within, the objective
of our current analysis is to describe the situation in terms of the
changing structure of social organization. In order to do so, I draw on
Hodge and Kress (1988)’s social semiotic theories as well as White
(1995)’s analysis of social movements. Another prominent feature of the
case-study is the interplay between the traditional news media and
activity on social media, and in fact communications technology and
social organization are closely related. In order to examine this
relationship, I refer to theory of the mediatization of society as
elaborated by Hjarvard (2013) and others, as well as comments from
Robertson (2015), Thierer (2010) and Fenton (2010) on the impact of
technology and media.

## Social movements and communication

In attempting to describe the controversy over Capehart’s article, one
of the first difficulties we encounter is how best to refer to Black
Lives Matter. Black Lives Matter is commonly referred to as a
‘movement’, which is the term we defaulted to in our close-reading
of the article; but as often as possible, we opted to describe its
impacts, or qualify its status in terms of prominence and popularity,
instead.

In the particular context of our case-study, White (1995)’s analysis of
social movements seemed uniquely pertinent. Rather than attempting to
define a social movement primarily in terms of membership and identity,
White instead analyzes social movements as:

> ‘a communication pattern which emerges “outside” and in opposition to
> the existing institutional, hierarchical (non-democratic) structure of
> communications in a society’ (White 1995).

At least according to these initial terms, what we earlier described
simply as a pattern of activity on social media platforms seems to
qualify as a social movement. An interesting reading that emerges at
this point is that \#BlackLivesMatter *is* Black Lives Matter, insofar
as we can conceive of the hashtag as a means of organizing the pattern
of communication in a meaningful way.

### Message, exchange, and significance

At this point it is useful to supplement our conceptual resources with
Hodge and Kress (1988)’s theory of social semiotics. With regard to
achieving an understanding of social movements as a communicative
process, it is primarily their analysis of the relationship between
message and social significance that holds relevance for us. Their
exposition of this system is worth reproducing in full:

> ‘The smallest semiotic form that has concrete existence is the
> *message*. The message has directionality—it has a source and a goal,
> a social context and purpose. It is oriented to the semiosic process,
> the social process by which meaning is constructed and exchanged,
> which takes place in what we will call the *semiosic plane*. The
> message is about something, which supposedly exists outside of itself.
> It is connected to a world to which it refers in some way, and its
> meaning derives from this representative or mimetic function it
> performs. We will call the plane in which representation occurs the
> *mimetic plane*’ (Hodge and Kress 1988).

Hodge and Kress conceive of ‘the semiosic process’ as ‘the social
process by which meaning is constructed and exchanged’. We may usefully
conceive of it as the system of exchange that informs the relationship
between message and significance—as, in a sense, the central, mediating
element in the system, analogous to what White might refer to as a
‘structure of communication’.

An important way Hodge and Kress (1988)’s ‘social semiotics’ intersects
with White (1995)’s analysis of social movements is that they both
conceive of communication and social organization to be in an almost
mutually deterministic relationship. As Hodge and Kress (1988) write,
‘\[f\]orms of intercourse (*verkehr*: communication, systems of
exchange) correspond to particular forms of social organization and are
necessary to their very existence’ (a view they attribute to Marx and
Engels’ analysis of ideology). While White prefers to frame his view of
the mechanism of social change in terms of the ‘democratization of
communication’, the relationship he posits between structures of
communication and social organization is fundamentally similar.

Although we earlier referred to White’s definition of social movement as
‘communication pattern’, defining a social movement exclusively in this
way introduces the analytical difficulty of setting criteria for the
coherence of a pattern. With reference to Hodge and Kress’s exposition
of the semiosic process, however, we see that they define the basic unit
in their system—the ‘message’—as an element that necessarily has
‘directionality’ in terms of social context and purpose. This reflects
what Hodge and Kress see as distinguishing their ‘social semiotic’
project compared to a more typically structuralist semiotics, namely
that they conceive of ‘the social dimensions of semiotic systems \[as\]
\[…\] intrinsic to their nature and function’ (Hodge and Kress 1988).
The implication of this idea is that patterns of communication are
intrinsically meaningful, and we cannot meaningfully conceive of such
patterns separately from a social context.

### Is Black Lives Matter a social movement?

Returning to our case-study, the question we are considering is if Black
Lives Matter is something that can be analyzed as a social movement
along the lines White (1995) defines. A definition of social movements
White proposes is as ‘a social organization of leaders and followers to
change power relations in the social system of which they are a part’
(White 1995). If we were to examine Black Lives Matter according to this
definition, we would have to distinguish between an organized core of
leaders and members, and a broader network of individuals that could be
regarded as an ‘organization’ only at a stretch, insofar as this broader
network can remain casually informed and engaged through social media
platforms.

However, because the definition White provides above was focused on
activity in the public sphere, e.g. decision-making about policy, other
aspects of White’s analysis may be more appropriate to the context we
are considering. An important conceptual point White makes is about what
makes social movements social, as compared to coercive. This is a
distinction he makes based on the nature of their core activity. As
White writes, ‘social movements remain “social” as long as they choose
to operate through the developing of new symbolic and communication
strategies and confront other sectors of society at the cultural level’
(White 1995). Taking activity and function as the measure, it becomes
easier to conceive of Black Lives Matter and \#BlackLivesMatter as
accomplishing exactly this.

In White’s mention of ‘symbolic and communication strategies’ as well,
we see echoes of Hodge and Kress (1988)’s theory of how messages
function on the mimetic and semiosic planes. In the context of our
case-study, Capehart’s deconstruction of the symbolic value of “hands
up, don’t shoot” and Michael Brown show how activity on the mimetic
plane is matter of core concern to a movement like Black Lives Matter.
That social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter were the initial
sites of \#BlackLivesMatter-related activity is likewise indicative of
how there is, to some extent, a conscious subversion of traditional
modes of communication and an attempt to reconfigure the semiosic
process.

## Theorizing the potential of social media

In attempting to analyze the controversy over Capehart’s report, another
difficulty we encountered was how to describe and account for the state
of public knowledge in the first place. One might plausibly speak of the
influence of the media on public opinion, insofar as it is at least
possible to imagine the mechanism by which broadcast media could affect
the state of public knowledge, for example via the transmission of
images and commentary to a mass audience. Pursuing this line of
conjecture, however, we see that it is a technologically specific
proposal, one that Robertson (2015) observes to be facing a serious
challenge; as she writes:

> ‘Social media—both in their form and use—render profoundly problematic
> \[…\] claims that mass communication involves a structured break
> between the producers and receivers of media messages, and that
> receivers can contribute little input to the production and
> dissemination of information’ (Robertson 2015).

Indeed, as we observed in our case-study, a prominent feature of the
situation was the interplay between the news media and social media. One
property of current media forms that Robertson identifies is their
‘processual nature’, due to the fact that they are ‘interactive and
perpetually updatable rather than fixed’. This is a description that is
reminiscent of Hodge and Kress (1988)’s notion of semiosic process,
which we also noted had its analogue in White (1995)’s analysis of
social organization. As such, it is no surprise that while White faced a
different techno-social context than we do with our case-study, we found
those aspects of his theory concerning communication to be especially
pertinent; as White writes,

> ‘Social movements tend to renovate and democratize virtually all
> aspects of the communication process: the definition of what
> communication means; the definition of what social sectors and social
> actors may participate in the public communication process; the
> employment of new media technology and the democratization of existing
> technology; the redefinition of “media professionalism” and the
> training of professionals \[…\] etc.’ (White 1995).

When put in the context of our case-study, what emerges as an unintended
implication of White’s analysis of social movements is that social media
platforms may be examples of technology that inherently afford the kind
of potential reconfiguration of the communication process that is the
hypothesized aim of social movements.

The possibility of such a reading gives credence to the idea that the
advent of communications technology like the internet and social media
is one that heralds a more democratic, less hierarchical model of access
to information, and influence over the definition of ‘public cultural
truth’ (a term which White uses in the context of public communication,
but which does not seem out of place in this more general discussion
about media and society).

## Media as technology

However, this is an idea that is not without its critics, and indeed the
opposite argument about the impact of communications technology on
society has also been made, albeit in the context of what we might call
‘old’ rather than new media. Whereas one may characterize the
potential of the relationship between new media technology and society
as emancipatory, the theory of mediatization seems to express exactly
the opposite sentiment about the relationship between broadcast media
and society, positing a relationship of dependency instead. For
instance, Hjarvard (2013) defines ‘mediatization’ as ‘the process
whereby culture and society to an increasing degree become dependent on
the media and their logic’ (Hjarvard 2013). In retrospect, we see that
while our examination of \#BlackLivesMatter in terms of White’s analysis
of social movements was more suggestive of the emancipatory potential of
new communications technology, we also realize that the initial
situation we examined of how the news media and social media conspired
to propagate a misleading version of events was more pessimistic.

Nevertheless, a point of fundamental commonality between the theory of
mediatization and White’s analysis is that they both posit that changes
to the communications process are reflected as changes in the social
order.

### Thierer on the impact of technology

In attempting to understand the impact of both traditional news media
and social media on the state of public knowledge, we have invoked two
theories to explain the impact of their associated technologies (i.e.
broadcast technology and the internet). In fact our attempts to evaluate
their impact may fall into a larger pattern.

In thinking about the impact of technologies like the internet on human
society, the conventional wisdom seems to be that, beyond giving people
the means to do old things in new ways, their impact has been profound
enough that people of the present think differently about themselves and
their activity in the world, than people in the past. At the same time,
however, opinions about what exactly the difference is tend to be
divided between optimism and pessimism, in a pattern that Adam Thierer
notices around not just the rise of the internet, but technological
development in general:

> ‘Indeed, a familiar cycle has \[repeated\] itself throughout history
> \[…\] A new technology appears. Those who fear the sweeping changes
> brought about by this technology see a sky that is about to fall.
> These “techno-pessimists” predict the death of the old order \[…\]
> Embracing this new technology, they fear, will result in the overthrow
> of traditions, beliefs, values, institutions, business models, and
> much else they hold sacred.
> 
> ‘The pollyannas, by contrast, look out at the unfolding landscape and
> see \[…\] a rose-colored world in which the technological revolution
> *du jour* is seen as improving the general lot of mankind and bringing
> about a better order \[…\] For such “techno-optimists,” progress means
> some norms and institutions must adapt—perhaps even disappear—for
> society to continue its march forward’ (Thierer 2010).

Implicit in Thierer’s analysis is the charge that neither the pessimists
nor the optimists are capable of objectively apprehending the dimensions
of the impact of a new technology. For the pessimists, change is a
‘death’ representing a loss of valued things. For the optimists,
change is ‘progress’, a word that often implicates the fulfillment of
some destiny.

### New vs. old media

The hypothesis that the impact of web technology has been profound
enough to qualitatively change the nature of media is captured in the
distinction made between ‘new media’ and traditional media. At the same
time, in line with the pattern Thierer observes, Natalie Fenton writes
in *New Media, Old News* (2010) that opinion about new media has also
been divided, with neither side being exactly right about the state of
change:

> ‘The techno-optimists who see the internet as reinvigorating
> democracy, enabling active citizenship and forging new connections
> across old frontiers within news remain firmly wedged in the starting
> blocks of potential. The techno-pessimists who see new media as
> commodified by corporations and the market as any ‘old media’ have
> also missed the point’ (Fenton 2010, 14).

Fenton’s assessment is best characterized, on the whole, as cautiously
optimistic. While new technology offers new potential, she sees media
and journalism as ‘an industry and a practice in flux’ (Fenton 2010) as
a result of this. A question that arises in response to this alleged
state of flux is whether the relationship between ‘professional
journalism, social network sites, and news search engines’ is best
understood as ‘competition or complementarity’ Neuberger (2013). Based
on a user survey on whether users regarded ‘social network sites \[…\]
as providing services essentially similar to journalistic sites’,
Neuberger suggests that despite the genuinely novel aspects of new
media, ‘it is unlikely journalism is in competition with social network
sites’.

Indeed perhaps it is the starting point for our case-study itself,
Capehart’s article, that best serves to demonstrate this. From the
vantage of an established traditional platform, Capehart was in a
position to both address the news media’s prior treatment of the Michael
Brown story, as well as address the complexly entangled context that had
developed.

# Concluding Comments

We know that Capehart’s piece proved influential, from subsequent
reports about Ferguson and Black Lives Matter that almost inevitably
reference it. However, another available measure of its influence I
searched for was its impact on the usage of \#HandsUpDontShoot. Table
[1](#fig:hashtagify-blm) captures the ten hashtags with the strongest
correlation with \#BlackLivesMatter. The table was generated using the
website hashtagify.me (CyBranding 2015), a hashtag search engine. We see
that while \#Ferguson, \#EricGarner, \#ICantBreathe, and even
\#MikeBrown make the list, \#HandsUpDontShoot does not.

![Table of hashtags correlated with \#BlackLivesMatter (from
[hashtagify.me](hashtagify.me))<span label="fig:hashtagify-blm"></span>](ism-capehart-hashtag)

One of the situations we examined was how the journalist as an
individual actor had to address several different contexts. In contrast
to the way ‘media’ is sometimes referred to as a conspiracy of interests
that imposes and flattens perspective, in our case-study we saw how the
influence of an audience connected to social media—an audience who can
no longer be ‘left to their own devices’ after a ‘structured break’
between generation and presentation of media content (Robertson
2015)—seemed almost to induce Capehart’s presentation of a range of
competing interests from a clearly signaled position. We therefore drew
on theoretical sources that allowed us to consider the question of
whether the influence of the audience was the product of underlying
technical factors, rather than a feature of a transient social or
political trend. The theme that emerged from this discussion was that
technologies of communication are fundamental rather than incidental to
patterns of social organization. While society can be though of as
that-which-structures communication, society can also be thought of in
terms of that-which-is-structured-by communication.

<div id="refs" class="references">

<div id="ref-capehart2015">

Capehart, Jonathan. 2015. “‘Hands up, don’t Shoot’ Was Built on a Lie.”
*Washington Post.*, March.

</div>

<div id="ref-hashtagify-blm">

CyBranding, Ltd. 2015. “All-Time Top 10 Hashtags Related to
\#Blacklivesmatter.”

</div>

<div id="ref-fenton2010">

Fenton, Natalie. 2010. *New Media, Old News*. SAGE Publications.

</div>

<div id="ref-guynn2015">

Guynn, Jessica. 2015. “Meet the Woman Who Coined \#BlackLivesMatter.”
*USA Today.*

</div>

<div id="ref-halpern2015">

Halpern, Jake. 2015. “The Cop.” *The New Yorker*, March.

</div>

<div id="ref-hjarvard2013">

Hjarvard, Stig. 2013. *The Mediatization of Culture and Society*.
London; New York: Routledge.

</div>

<div id="ref-hodgekress1988">

Hodge, Robert, and Gunther Kress. 1988. *Social Semiotics*. Ithaca, New
York: Cornell University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-neuberger2013">

Neuberger, Christoph. 2013. “Competition or Complementarity?:
Journalism, Social Network Sites, and News Search Engines.” In
*Journalism and Media Convergence*, edited by Heinz-Werner Nienstedt,
Stephan Russ-Mohl, and Bartosz Wilczek, 119–30. Berlin/Boston: Walter de
Gruyter GmbH.

</div>

<div id="ref-robertson2015">

Robertson, Alexa. 2015. *Media and Politics in a Globalizing World*.
Great Britain: Polity Books.

</div>

<div id="ref-thierer2010">

Thierer, Adam. 2010. “Are You an Internet Optimist or Pessimist? The
Great Debate over Technology’s Impact on Society.”

</div>

<div id="ref-white1995">

White, Robert A. 1995. “Democratization of Communication as Social
Movement Process.” In *The Democratization of Communication*, edited by
Philip Lee, 93–113. Cardiff: University of Wales Press.

</div>

</div>
